projects/index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Open Source Projects
---

# Personal Projects

**[pip-db](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/pip-db)** - A search engine
and data analysis application for storing specific biological data,
which allows scientific researchers to query particular molecular
properties of proteins.

**[emu](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/emu)** - Fast snapshot backup
software inspired by git and Apple's Time Machine. Creates a compact
rotating history of file system revisions, capable of transparently
handling huge volumes of data without the need for arbitrary binary
blobs.

**[shit.js](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/shit.js)** - A proof of
concept realtime intrusion detection system for Linux that offers
remote file system monitoring and tamper prevention through a web
interface, written in Node.js. Acronym for *S*ecure *H*ost *I*ntrusion
*T*echnology. Proof that I can not and should not name projects.

**[liquid-src](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/liquid-src)** - A tiny
JavaScript library that allows for very simple management of
hyperlinks across multiple HTML pages.

**[euclid](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/euclid)** - A toy x86
operating system kernel, written in C and assembly.

**[pat](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/pat)** - A lightweight mail
notification daemon for email clients on Linux desktops.

# Contributions

**[GNOME](http://www.gnome.org/)** - A desktop environment and application
suite for Linux. My contributions include multiple patches for a
number of different applications, such as the contact manager, control
centre and [photo manager](http://www.yorba.org/projects/shotwell/).

**[Linux](https://www.kernel.org/)** - The popular operating system
kernel. I was fortunate enough to get the opportunity to author a
patch which enables improved debugging in the ioctl subsystem.

**[Wayland](http://wayland.freedesktop.org/)** - I have developed
Wayland-enabling features for the [GTK+](http://www.gtk.org/),
[Cogl](http://www.cogl3d.org/) and
[Clutter](http://blogs.gnome.org/clutter/) libraries, including
implementing animated cursors and client side decorations.

**[Rig](http://roblog.sixbynine.org/2012/10/rig-1-ui-designer-engine.html)** -
A unique 3D UI design tool, which enables the power of modern GPUs in
user interfaces. I developed a prototype of organic swarming
behaviours, modelling the flocking behaviour and movements of birds in
flight.

Commit message:

projects: Add "Read More" links to blog posts

projects/index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Open Source Projects
---

# Personal Projects

**[pip-db](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/pip-db)** - A search engine
and data analysis application for storing specific biological data,
which allows scientific researchers to query particular molecular
properties of proteins.

**[emu](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/emu)** - Fast snapshot backup
software inspired by git and Apple's Time Machine. Creates a compact
rotating history of file system revisions, capable of transparently
handling huge volumes of data without the need for arbitrary binary
blobs.
[Read More >>](/posts/emu-by-example/)

**[shit.js](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/shit.js)** - A proof of
concept realtime intrusion detection system for Linux that offers
remote file system monitoring and tamper prevention through a web
interface, written in Node.js. Acronym for *S*ecure *H*ost *I*ntrusion
*T*echnology. Proof that I can not and should not name projects.

**[liquid-src](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/liquid-src)** - A tiny
JavaScript library that enables very simple centralised management of
hyperlinks across websites and pages.
[Read More >>](/posts/scratching-an-itch/)

**[euclid](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/euclid)** - A toy x86
operating system kernel, written in C and assembly.

**[pat](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/pat)** - A lightweight mail
notification daemon for email clients on Linux desktops.

# Contributions

**[GNOME](http://www.gnome.org/)** - A desktop environment and application
suite for Linux. My contributions include multiple patches for a
number of different applications, such as the contact manager, control
centre and [photo manager](http://www.yorba.org/projects/shotwell/).

**[Linux](https://www.kernel.org/)** - The popular operating system
kernel. I was fortunate enough to get the opportunity to author a
patch which enables improved debugging in the ioctl subsystem.

**[Wayland](http://wayland.freedesktop.org/)** - I have developed
Wayland-enabling features for the [GTK+](http://www.gtk.org/),
[Cogl](http://www.cogl3d.org/) and
[Clutter](http://blogs.gnome.org/clutter/) libraries, including
implementing animated cursors and client side decorations.

**[Rig](http://roblog.sixbynine.org/2012/10/rig-1-ui-designer-engine.html)** -
A unique 3D UI design tool, which enables the power of modern GPUs in
user interfaces. I developed a prototype of organic swarming
behaviours, modelling the flocking behaviour and movements of birds in
flight.
