---
layout: default
title: Curriculum Vitae
---

# Professional Experience

###### Intel Corporation   (2012-2013)

Developed Linux middleware for the GNOME desktop and Wayland. Debugged
kernel GPU drivers in assembly and C. Specialised graphics programming
for low level Open GL libraries and toolkits, as well as in-browser 3D
graphics using JavaScript and HTML5 canvas/WebGL. Rapid prototyping on
Android handsets, working with wireframes and mockups generated by a
design team.

###### Freelance web developer (2010-Ongoing)

Working with small business clients to turn ideas into a finished
website, including graphic design and branding.  Extensive frontend
experience in JavaScript using jQuery and Bootstrap, and backend
development using Clojure, PHP, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Node.js, and
Jekyll.

###### Rolls Royce Holdings PLC (2008)
Summer week placement within the Design Methods group.

# Key Skills

###### Software Engineering

Advanced programming in Python, C/C++, Java and JavaScript. Experience
with PHP/Apache and SQL backends. Full stack experience from debugging
kernel drivers, to JavaScript frontend development. Particular
interest in distributed application development.

###### Electronic Engineering

I have a traditional background in engineering and mathematics,
covering digital logic synthesis networking theory and protocols,
hardware design and embedded systems.

###### Product development

I have a results driven attitude towards delivering products, with
experience working with agile and test driven development processes. I
apply a consistent and methodical approach to all projects, from using
good version control practises to working within large and small
teams.

###### Communication skills

Excellent written and verbal communication skills, including working
effectively with geographically distributed and inter-disciplinary
teams, both in remote and office environments.

# Education

Aston University (2014)

 * MEng Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

Birkdale School (2009)

* A Levels - Electronics, Mathematics, Physics
* AS Levels - Electronics, Economics, Mathematics, Physics

----

#### [Download the full PDF](/assets/cv.pdf)
