---
layout: default
title: Open Source Projects
---

# Open Source Projects

##### Projects that I have worked on

[GNOME](http://www.gnome.org/) - A desktop environment and application
suite for Linux. My contributions include multiple patches for a
number of different applications, such as the contact manager, control
centre and [photo manager](http://www.yorba.org/projects/shotwell/).

[Linux Kernel](https://www.kernel.org/) - The popular operating system
kernel. I was fortunate enough to get the opportunity to author a
patch which enables improved debugging in the ioctl subsystem.

[Wayland](http://wayland.freedesktop.org/) - I have developed
Wayland-enabling features for the [GTK+](http://www.gtk.org/),
[Cogl](http://www.cogl3d.org/) and
[Clutter](http://blogs.gnome.org/clutter/) libraries, including
implementing animated cursors and client side decorations.

[Rig](http://roblog.sixbynine.org/2012/10/rig-1-ui-designer-engine.html) -
A unique 3D UI design tool, which enables the power of modern GPUs in
user interfaces. I developed a prototype of organic swarming
behaviours for this, modelling the flocking behaviour and movements of
birds in flight.

##### Projects that I have created

[pip-db](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/pip-db) - A search engine and
data analysis application for storing specific biological data, which
allows scientific researchers to query particular molecular properties
of proteins.

[liquid-src](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/liquid-src) - A tiny
JavaScript library that allows for very simple management of
hyperlinks across multiple HTML pages.

[emu](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/emu) - Snapshot backup software
inspired by Apple's Time Machine and git, creating a compact rotating
history of file system revisions, implemented completely transparently
and automatable.

[shit.js](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/shit.js) - A "proof of
concept" intrusion detection system that offers realtime filesystem
monitoring and tamper prevention with a remote web interface, written
in Node.js.

[pat](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/pat) - A lightweight mail
notification daemon for email clients on Linux desktops.

[euclid](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/euclid) - A toy x86 operating
system kernel, written in C and assembly.
