---
layout: default
title: pip-db - Final Project Report
render_post: true
---

<div class="paper">
  <a href="/u/aston/pip-db/report.pdf"
     title="Click to read full paper" target="_blank">
    <img src="/u/aston/pip-db/report.png"/>
  </a>
  <p class="description">
    Mark attained: 90%.
  </p>
</div>

###### Formal feedback

This is a truly exceptional piece of work of extremely high quality,
insight and diligence. An appropriate lifecycle model has been
followed in depth; new development tools created (that could have
formed a project in their own right); a highly user-centred design
approach was followed, leading to strong user approval of the product;
a full prototype was implemented; the student learned a new
programming language (Clojure) and mastered it in a few weeks. To give
a measure of the scale of the achievement, 2,420 code revisions were
committed and over 34,000 lines of code written. The only real
criticism would be that all the toolwork and change of programming
language restricted the time available for development of
functionality: the lack of tools to add to the dataset is a
loss. However, given the scale of achievement, this is a minor
quibble. A lot of deep thought has gone into every decision made
during this project, and this is clearly conveyed in the
report. Quantitative and qualitative measures are used to assess the
impact of decisions (for example, a reduction of 75% in the size of
the code base when moving from PHP to Clojure). The use trials were a
bit limited (just 5 users) as the student recognized himself. The
report is also a great piece of work. Exceptionally clearly written
and grammatically sound (I counted fewer than 5 errors in 67 pages),
it makes good use of diagrams and really explains some difficult
concepts with excellent examples and code fragments. All the practical
work is backed up by theory drawn from the literature (there were 51
references). This is a very well written report on an outstanding
project with exceptional work approximating a professional standard
and contribution to the knowledge of database design for medical
applications. The end-product is characterised by a very high standard
of functionality and usability. A novel application of Markov chains
has been used in generating the test data. The end-product has been
thoroughly reviewed and critically analysed based on appropriate
theoretical references, however it would be better to involve the
comparison with other similar products in the evaluation. The standard
of writing is close to professional standard, with nearly no flaws in
English, typography (just one Chapter number missing on page 2) or
presentation. A lot of relevant academic references are used. Diagrams
and tables are appropriately used for illustration. Just a couple of
suggestions: the Chapter titles can be a bit more detailed showing
what process, infrastructure and evaluation etc. The caption of some
figures (Figure 4.2, 5.4 â€“ 5.10) can be more concise, with detailed
description/explanation in the main text instead of in the figure
caption.
