---
layout: default
title: CS theory revisited
---

As I enter my final term of studies, I will shortly be joining the overcrowded
pool of freshly graduated 20-somethings with a computer science degree. In
preparation for this, I've been reading a lot about [people's
experiences](http://css-tricks.com/interviewing-front-end-engineer-san-francisco/)
with programming job interviews, and have come to realise two things:

1. Domain-specific knowledge is less important than I thought it was.
2. Job interviewers love to focus on *theory*.

By theory, I mean things like algorithmic complexity, logic puzzles, and big O
notation. As a result, I'm now terrified of the fact that while I consider
myself a decent programmer and come out near the top of my class, the fact that
I didn't retain all of the knowledge from my data structures and algorithms
module at University may lose me future employment.

Sit me down and ask me to write an application and I'll get straight to work,
but sit me down and ask me [the most efficient way to sort one million
integers](http://youtu.be/k4RRi_ntQc8) and I'll burst into tears before your
eyes.

Now, while I have little actual experience of job interviews, I can imagine that
openly weeping is pretty high up on the list of things to avoid doing, right
alongside aggravated assault and calling the hiring manager a tosser. If I'm to
have any chance of avoiding this disaster scenario, I need a plan.

Once a day for the next 30 days, I'm going to sit down with my leg-numbingly
heavy copy of [Introduction to
Algorithms](http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/introduction-algorithms) and go "back
to square one", covering one topic per day - binary search trees, heap sort,
recursion - all the theory that I've learned in the classroom but never needed
to apply in the real world.

I've set up a [repository](https://github.com/ChrisCummins/cstp) to document my
progress, and will report back in 30 days with my findings!
