---
layout: default
title: Starting a Ph.D.
---

Two months ago I joined the the University of Edinburgh as one of the
first students of the
[CDT in Pervasive Parallelism](http://pervasiveparallelism.inf.ed.ac.uk/).
This post consists of a brief account of my experience applying for
and accepting the position as a PhD student.

The CDT (College for Doctoral Training) that I have joined is a four
year course that consists of a first year MSc by Research, followed by
a traditional three year PhD. There are ten students in this first
cohort, all working under the same broad remit of addressing the
challenges presented by *pervasive parallelism*.

The journey I took to arrive in my current position consisted of two
stages: the first was in deciding that I wanted to become a
postgraduate student, and the second was doing everything in my power
to realise that ambition.

----

I was relatively late to the decision of becoming an academic and
forgoing a "real" job. I had entered my final year of undergrad
studies having spent an incredible year working in Intel's
[Open Source Technology Center](https://01.org/), in a wonderful
London office which allowed me to hone my software development skills
and contribute to some great open source projects (and some terrible
closed source ones). The decision not to rejoin them after graduating
was not an easy one to make, and the rationale changed from day to
day: was it that I wanted to distance myself from the "corporate
machine"? To be intellectually free? To make a dent in the boundary of
human knowledge? To truly absorb myself in a field of research? The
simple and selfish truth is that I was having *too much fun in
Uni*. The joy of continuously learning, practising, and improving,
meant that a PhD was the only logical choice for my next career move.

Once I had decided to become a postgraduate student (trepidatiously,
at first), I began searching for the right position, and was quickly
overwhelmed by the sheer range of available courses, Universities,
fields of research, and potential supervisors. Compared to applying
for graduate jobs or even undergraduate degrees (a process that has
long since faded from memory), the process of applying for a PhD is
more proactive and somewhat alienating. When looking for a job, you
find a list of employees who have advertised open positions, you pick
one or two that appeal to you and submit CVs. By contrast, the PhD
application process starts with you *creating* a job: you find a
potential supervisor at an institution of your choice and you have to
get them motivated about your field of research and make them want to
hire you.

I sought advice from my undergraduate supervisor, who gave me a short
list of recommended Universities to consider, of which Edinburgh was
one. Once I found the CDT website, it immediately became clear to me
that this was the right position for me, and thankfully, after the
initial feeling of being overwhelmed and crippled by choice, Edinburgh
was the **only** University I ended up submitting an application to.

After deciding that the Pervasive Parallelism course was the right one
for me, the application process was relatively straightforward. From a
list of supervisors available on the school website, I chose two whose
research area appealed to me the most, and cold-emailed them to
register my interest as a possible research student. Of the two
supervisors I contacted, I received a very positive response from one,
and after two informal Skype interviews, a coding challenge, and a
review of my research proposal, I was provisionally offered a
place. The provisional aspect of their offer was dependent on my
successful completion of a formal application with the University,
which went without a hitch, and was largely an exercise in providing
information about my academic history and expected degree.

For me, the most unexpected part of the application process was the
lack of "filtering". At any reasonably sized company, you can expect a
job application to go through at least one layer of indirection, as it
gets filtered through the HR department before getting near to the
people you will be working with. When applying for a PhD, your first
interaction will likely be with world experts in your intended
research field, and this can be as intimidating as it is
direct. Still, know that this intimidation is entirely unfounded, and
my entire application process was an utter pleasure and very
enjoyable.

----

I share my research proposal here not because it is in any way
representative of my current research (it's not), nor as a model of a
good research proposal (it's *definitely* not), but purely as a
curiosity to the interested reader. When writing my proposal, I found
that examples proposals in related fields in were hard to come by, and
I would have appreciated having some more to refer to when writing my
own.

#### [Research Proposal](/u/ed/application.pdf)
